Let us take another look at greedy algorithms.
So, we are looking at algorithms where we
need to achieve a global optimum by making
a sequence of choices. So, in a greedy strategy
what we do is we make the next choice based
on some local criteria. So, there maybe a
number of choices we could make, but we just
pick one of them based on something which
looks good at the moment and now we never
go back and revise an earlier decision.
So, we deterministically search through this
space of solutions by picking of good choice
at each step and this drastically reduces
the space in which we have to search. So,
the tricky thing is that, this strategy very
often does not work. So, if you have a greedy
strategy in mind, we need to go back and prove
that the way we made our local choices actually
achieves the global optimum.
So, we have seen three algorithms so far which
follow this greedy paradigm. The first was
DijkstraÕs algorithm for the single source
shortest path problem. So, recall that in
this algorithm we kept burning vertices and
at each stage we froze the distance to the
nearest unburnt vertex and claim that this
would in fact be the shortest distance to
that vertex from the source. So, globally
the optimum we achieved in this algorithm
is that the distance assigned by this greedy
strategy happens to be the shortest distance
from the source.
A closely related algorithm is PrimÕs algorithm
for the minimum cost spanning tree. So, here
we incrementally build up a tree and at each
stage we add to this spanning tree, the nearest
vertex that is not yet in the tree. And here
the global optimum that we achieved is that
we construct the spanning tree that is minimum
cost. Another algorithm for a minimum cost
spanning tree is KruskalÕs algorithm.
Here, we do not build up a tree directly,
but rather we keep collecting edges and form
a connected component overall which becomes
a tree. So, here we keep adding to the current
set of edges in our set, the next smallest
edge that does not form a cycle with those
at we have already choose and now the global
optimum is that the edges that we collect
in this way form a minimum cost spanning tree.
So, now let us look at a completely different
problem, a problem called interval scheduling.
So, suppose we have a special video class
room, where we can deliver online lectures.
Now, different teachers want to book the class
room to deliver classes and each instructor
has a slot that he would like to deliver this
lecture in. So, instructor i has a slot, let
us starts at a time s i and finishes it at
f i. So, you have a slot which starts at s
i and finishes at f i, now two instructors
may have over lapping slot.
So, the maybe somebody who wants the slot
like this, so the blue slot starts before
the red slot ends, so obviously both these
slots cannot be in given bookings, because
there were interfere with each other. So,
our task is to look at the set of bookings
and chooses subset which is feasible that
is no two bookings that we choose interfere
with each other. So, there we maximize a number
of teachers who get to use the room.
So, broadly if we follow a greedy approach,
this is what we would do. Among all the bookings
that are not yet allocated and which are still
available to allocate. We will pick one based
on some local strategy, then we would remove
all conflicting bookings, bookings that overlapped
with this booking that with the slot that
we just allocated and somehow we have to argue
that this sequence of bookings that we are
choosing maximizes the number of teachers
who get to use the room.
So, let us look at some typical greedy strategies
that one might want. So, one strategy might
be to choose the booking whose start time
is earliest, but it is not difficult to come
up with the counter example. So, if you look
at this picture, there is one long green booking
it start earliest and in fact ends after all
the other bookings are made.
So, if we use this greedy strategy we would
allocate this very long booking and the entire
period it will be allocated to just one teacher,
whereas if we choose the booking that start
a little later, then we could actually satisfied
six teachers bookings and since our goal is
to maximize the number of teachers, who can
use the room that could be a better strategy.
So, this greedy strategy is clearly flawed.
And other greedy strategy we might think of
is to choose a booking whose interval is shortest.
Once again here is a counter example, the
interval in the middle is the shortest one,
but if we choose this it is in conflict with
both the other bookings, so we have to rule
both of them optimum. So, if we choose a shortest
interval then we can only allocate one teacher
to the room, whereas if we know the strategy
and if we choose the too longer intervals,
then we can actually use the room for two
teachers and get a better optimum for the
problem that we have chosen.
So, the previous example suggest that there
is something to do with conflicts, so maybe
we might choose bookings in terms of how many
other bookings they rule out. So, one strategy
now we might think of is to choose the booking
that overlaps with the minimum number of other
bookings. In other words, by choosing this
booking we rule out as few other bookings
is possible. So, let us look at this example,
here the center booking overlaps with only
two, this one and this one, every other booking
overlaps with at least three.
So, if we choose this booking, then we rule
out the bookings on either side of it and
that means, there we also, we can do either
this one or one of these. So, if we take this
center booking we can do at most three bookings
overall, we cannot do the two in either side
of it. So, we can either do the two extreme
ones or we can do anyone of these and anyone
of these. So, we can do a total of three,
we can allocate a total three bookings among
these. However, if we do not do this, if we
choose a better strategy, a better strategy
would be to clearly take the four on the top.
So, we can allocate four teachers in this
room, if we do not use this strategy, then
we must pick the one with the minimum number
of conflicts. So, this greedy strategy also
fails.
So, here is a fourth strategy, instead of
choosing the one like we begin with whose
start time is earliest, let us choose the
one whose finished time is earliest. So, can
we come up with the counter example or should
we instead try to prove this is correct. So,
in fact this strategy does work and let us
see how we can prove it.
Before we prove it, let us formally write
down the algorithm a little more clearly.
So, we start with the set of bookings B and
we want to construct from this set, a subset
A of accepted bookings. So, initially we have
no accepted bookings, because we just starting
to build this set and now we do the following.
So, as long as we have pending bookings which
are still feasible, we pick that booking which
has the smallest finishing time among the
set which is still with us and we add that
to b, that to A and now having added that
to A, we cannot schedule any more bookings
which overlapped with this b.
So, we remove from our set capital B, all
the bookings which overlapped with the booking
b that we just choose. So, each time we pick
up the next booking which is still available
with the smallest finishing time and we remove
everything which is in conflict to it.
So, here is an example of how our algorithm
works. So, here we have nine bookings, the
blue lines indicate the bookings and the numbers
of the bookings are given above it. So, in
this, the one with theÉ So, initially our
set B has all these nine bookings and our
set A is initially empty. So, now what we
look at, it is a smallest finishing time among
nine bookings and that happens to be 1. So,
we select 1 and then having selected 1, we
find all the bookings which overlap with it.
So, 2 overlaps with 1 and stored at 6, so
we will move 2 from our set and we will remove
6 from our set, so now B has been thrown to
3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 and A has the booking number
1. So, now among this feasible set 3, 4, 5,
7, 8, 9 we pick the one that ends earliest
which is 3 and then since 4 is in conflict
with 3, we remove 4. So, continuing in this
way we now pick 5, because 5 is earliest one
to finish and then because 7 is in conflict
with 5, we remove 7.
And now we have two left, 8 and 9, but 8 finishes
before 9, we could actually pick either one,
but our algorithm will pick 8, because 8 has
the shortest finishing time. So, we pick 8
and then we will say that 9 is not feasible,
so we do not pick it and now we have the B
is empty and A is 1, 3, 5, 8 and since B is
empty, we have no more jobs to schedule, no
more bookings to honor, so the algorithm ends.
So, we have found a feasible set of four bookings
that can be accommodated with in this list.
So, our goal is to show that the algorithm,
the solution A produce by our algorithm is
actually correct. So, suppose there is an
optimal set of bookings O, now we cannot in
general assume that our solution A is identical
to O, because there maybe multiple ways of
producing solutions of the same size. Remember
that all we want is a solution which allocates
as many teachers as possible to rooms. So,
there maybe two different ways to allocate
the same number of teachers, so we cannot
argue that A and O are identical, but it is
suffices to show that A and O are of the same
size. In other words, no matter of what optimal
booking is produced by some other strategy,
our strategy our greedy strategy produces
one which is of the same size.
So, let A be the set of bookings that our
strategy chooses and this could be the order
and which we chooses, so i 1 is chosen first
and then i 2 and so on, so when i 1 is chosen
and i 2 is still feasible and since i 1 was
the earliest finishing time overall, we have
that the finishing of i 1 is before the starting
time of i 2, the finishing time of i 2 is
before the starting time of i 3 and so on.
So, these bookings in A are in sorted order,
now let us assume that we have an optimum
solution with m bookings j 1 to j m again
in sorted order. So, j 1 ends before j 2 starts,
j 2 ends before j 3 starts and so on. So,
our goal is to show that k in fact is the
same as m, in other words the optimum solution
is of the same size as the solution that the
greedy strategy produces.
So, we will actually show that for each job
in the sequence i and j, the corresponding
job in the A sequence finishes no later than
the corresponding job in the O sequence. So,
for every r up to k, f of i r is earlier than
or equal to f of j r. So, in this sense we
are trying to argue that the greedy solution
stays ahead of any optimum solution, we may
produce by any other method.
So, the proof of this claim is by induction
on r. So, when we look at the first job i
1, we know that i 1 is overall the earliest
finish time among all the jobs, all the bookings
in our list, since i 1 has the earliest finish
time over all the bookings, it must definitely
be less than or equal to f of j 1, because
j 1 cannot be smaller than the overall finish
time.
Now, let us assume that we have establish
by induction that up to r minus 1, the booking
i minus, i of r minus 1 has a finish time
which is earlier than booking j of r minus
1. Then, we claim it must be the case that
i r finishes before j r, because if we did
not have this then we would have the picture
as below. So, we have that i r minus 1 finishes
before j r minus 1.
Now, suppose we claim that j r actually ends
before i r, then our algorithm would at this
stage find the j r is still feasible, because
it does not overlap with i r minus 1 and among
the jobs which remain j r has an earlier finishing
time than i r. So, our greedy strategy would
pick j r rather than i r, so therefore the
fact that we have picked i r and not j r means
that we cannot have a picture like this. It
cannot be that i r ends strictly after j r,
it must end before or at the same time as
j r.
So, now having shown that the greedy strategy
always stays ahead, we will now claim that
actually our solution must be optimum. So,
suppose that m is actually strictly greater
than k, then we know that when we reach i
k, it is before j k. Now, because we have
a solution which is longer than k, there is
another job after this called j k plus 1,
assuming that m is strictly, because this
goes up to job booking j m. So, since this
happens there must be a sequence of job, sequence
of bookings after j k, so let us look at the
sequence.
Now, the claim is that this particular booking
at this point is not ruled out by anything
that is happened before, so if we look at
i 1 up to i k, none of these overlap with
j k plus 1, because j k plus 1 is after j
k. So, i k finishes before j k and j k finishes
before j k plus 1 starts. Therefore, i k is
compatible with j k plus 1, this means at
this stage B is not empty.
When we have to finish in our greedy algorithm
processing i 1 to i k B is not empty, but
we claim that we start with i k and the only
reason our greedy algorithm will stops is
because B is empty. So, if there is a job
or a booking j k plus 1, then it cannot be
that our algorithm stopped at this point,
so there is a contradiction. So, therefore
we cannot have any bookings in the optimum
solution which go beyond k and therefore,
m must be equal to k.
So, having shown that it is correct, let us
just quickly look at how we would implement
this and estimate the upper bound of the complexity.
So, initially we sort the n bookings by finishing
time, this takes time n log n for n bookings
and now let us assume if the bookings are
renumbered 1, 2 up to n in this sorted order.
So, booking 1 has an earliest finishing time,
booking 2 has a second earliest finishing
time and so on.
Now, we set up in one order n scan, an array
ST such that ST of i contains the starting
time of booking array. Now, we start with
booking 1 and each time we choose a booking
j, we start from j plus 1 and keeps scanning
the start time of bookings till we find the
earliest k whose starting time is beyond f
of j. In other words, we are lookingÉ So,
so we know that these bookings are in order
of finishing time.
So, we know that after j the booking that
ends next is j plus 1, but if its starting
time is not beyond the finishing time of j,
it is overlapping, so it cannot be compatible.
So, we just scan this array ST until we find
the smallest k which actually starts after
f j ends. So, in this way one order n scan
we can go through all our bookings and pick
up a greedy optimum set. So, this is an order
n scan sorting takes order n log in, so overall
this greedy strategy is correct and it takes
time O n log n.